Zuul internationalization
=========================

The Zuul dashboard supports multiple languages. In alphabetical order:

* English (US)

Adding a language
-----------------

If you are fluent in a language, you can add support for it in Zuul by following
these steps.

#. Create a new locale folder in web/src/locales. It should be named after the
   international, four-letter language code of the new language.
#. Copy web/src/locales/fr_FR/translations.json (or any existing translation file you
   want to use as a base) into the new folder.
#. Translate all the strings!
#. Import your new JSON file in web/src/locales/translations.js, following the existing
   model for already supported languages.
#. In web/src/locales/config.js, add your language to ``supportedLocales``.
#. Add your language at the top of this document.

Commit and submit for review.

Adding new strings
------------------

In the React application
........................

Two helper functions, ``_`` and ``t``, can be imported from ``locale/utils``. These
make translation handling fairly transparent for the developer.

``_`` returns a translated Component that gets updated automatically when a user changes
the language setting. This should be used in rendering functions, nested inside
other components or HTML tags. Example:

.. code-block:: javascript

   render (
       [...]
       <FormGroup controlId='jobs-flatten'>
         &nbsp; {_('Flatten list')} &nbsp;
       [...]
   )

``t`` can be used to translate any string that cannot be nested into a component,
for example properties within a component or HTML tag. Example:

.. code-block:: javascript

   <FormControl
       type='text'
       placeholder={t('job name')}
       defaultValue={filter}
       inputRef={i => this.filter = i}
       onKeyPress={this.handleKeyPress} />

In the worst case scenario, using ``t`` will *always* work.

Many examples covering most use cases, like templating and plurals, can be found
in the dashboard's source code.

In translations.json files
..........................

A yarn script can be used to help update existing translations.json files with
the new translated strings, or generate a new translations.json file from another
locale:

.. code-block:: shell

   yarn update-translation <language-code>

where ``language-code`` is an existing locale. The script generates a pseudo-JSON
object. Once completed, overwrite the existing translations.json file with the
updated values.

Under the hood
--------------

Translating is done with the **react-redux-i18n** library.
More details on how to work with react-redux-i18n can be found on the project's
`repository`_ , and in this `tutorial`_.

.. _repository: https://github.com/artisavotins/react-redux-i18n
.. _tutorial: https://phrase.com/blog/posts/react-redux-tutorial-internationalization-with-react-i18n-redux/

Adding translations in a language you don't know
------------------------------------------------

If you are adding a new feature to the Zuul dashboard, chances are you might
not be able to translate the extra text in every language supported by Zuul.
As long as the english version of the extra text is correct, missing translations
should *never* prevent a feature from being merged. It is however advised to
notify known Zuul translators, so that they can work with you on the translation
of your feature in their language.

Unofficial list of Zuul dashboard translators
---------------------------------------------

Feel free to add these people to your reviews if you need help with a specific
language translation:

-

Known limitations
-----------------

Strings translated using the `t` method are not refreshed when the user selects
a language. A simple workaround is to switch to another page in the dashboard,
then come back.

TODO
----

Localize durations. There is probably support for this in the Moment library.
