doc/source/admin/gerrit_setup.rst, before:

:orphan:

Gerrit
======

Installation
------------

Gerrit can be downloaded from the `Gerrit Code Review <https:///www.gerritcodereview.com>`_ web site, and also contains Gerrit documentation with
installation instructions.

Create a Zuul User
------------------

The Gerrit documentation walks you through adding a first user, which will
end up being the admin user. Once the admin user is created, and SSH access
has been setup for that user, you can use that account to create a new 'zuul'
user. This user, which will be used by our Zuul installation, must have SSH
access to gerrit, and have the `stream-events <https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/Documentation/access-control.html#global_capabilities>`_ ACL enabled.

As the admin user, create the 'zuul' user, and import an SSH key for 'zuul'::

  $ cat $PUBKEY | ssh -p 29418 $USER@localhost gerrit create-account \
     --group "'Registered Users'" --ssh-key - zuul

`$PUBKEY` is the location of the SSH public key for the 'zuul' user. `$USER` is
the username for the admin user.

The 'zuul' user should now be able to stream events::

  $ ssh -p 29418 zuul@localhost gerrit stream-events

Configure Gerrit
----------------

The 'zuul' user (and any other users you may create, for that matter) will
need to be able to leave review votes on any project hosted in your Gerrit.
This is done with the use of Gerrit `Review Labels <https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/Documentation/access-control.html#category_review_labels>`_.
You may need to add the proper label permissions to the All-Projects project,
which defines ACLs that all other projects will inherit.

Visting `Projects` -> `List` -> `All-Projects` -> `Access` in your Gerrit lets
you see the current access permissions. In the ``Reference: refs/heads/*``
section, you will need to add a permisson for the `Label Code-Review` for
the `Registered Users` group (we added the 'zuul' user to this group when we
created it).

.. note:: The label you configure here must match the label referenced in
          your Zuul pipeline definitions. We've chosen the Code-Review label
          here as an example.

Create a New Project
--------------------

The admin user can create new projects in Gerrit, which users can then clone
and use to submit code changes. Zuul will monitor the Gerrit event stream for
these submissions.

To create a new project named 'demo-project'::

  $ ssh -p 29418 $USER@localhost gerrit create-project demo-project --empty-commit

Modify the Project
------------------

* Clone the project::

  $ git clone ssh://$USER@localhost:29418/demo-project.git

* Install the change ID hook that Gerrit requires::

  $ cd demo-project
  $ scp -p -P 29418 $USER@localhost:hooks/commit-msg .git/hooks/

* Now you are ready to modify the project and push the changes to Gerrit::

  $ echo "test" > README.txt
  $ git add .
  $ git commit -m "First commit"
  $ git push origin HEAD:refs/for/master

You should now be able to see your change in Gerrit.

Commit message:

Use code-block for admin documentation and terminal prompts
The documentation contains commands to install and configure various
tools and services such as zuul, nodepool, and gerrit. There are also
yaml and ini config file snippets as examples.

This change switches to code-blocks for the commands and snippets to
make the documentation consistent. Apart from this, terminal prompts
are added to comply with OpenStack documentation standards and for
consistency.

Change-Id: I90b571bb4645984f07009b3cb7bd513b9d796d08

doc/source/admin/gerrit_setup.rst, after:

:orphan:

Gerrit
======

Installation
------------

Gerrit can be downloaded from the `Gerrit Code Review <https:///www.gerritcodereview.com>`_ web site, and also contains Gerrit documentation with
installation instructions.

Create a Zuul User
------------------

The Gerrit documentation walks you through adding a first user, which will
end up being the admin user. Once the admin user is created, and SSH access
has been setup for that user, you can use that account to create a new 'zuul'
user. This user, which will be used by our Zuul installation, must have SSH
access to gerrit, and have the `stream-events <https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/Documentation/access-control.html#global_capabilities>`_ ACL enabled.

As the admin user, create the 'zuul' user, and import an SSH key for 'zuul'

.. code-block:: console

   $ cat $PUBKEY | ssh -p 29418 $USER@localhost gerrit create-account \
         --group "'Registered Users'" --ssh-key - zuul

`$PUBKEY` is the location of the SSH public key for the 'zuul' user. `$USER` is
the username for the admin user.

The 'zuul' user should now be able to stream events

.. code-block:: console

   $ ssh -p 29418 zuul@localhost gerrit stream-events

Configure Gerrit
----------------

The 'zuul' user (and any other users you may create, for that matter) will
need to be able to leave review votes on any project hosted in your Gerrit.
This is done with the use of Gerrit `Review Labels <https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/Documentation/access-control.html#category_review_labels>`_.
You may need to add the proper label permissions to the All-Projects project,
which defines ACLs that all other projects will inherit.

Visting `Projects` -> `List` -> `All-Projects` -> `Access` in your Gerrit lets
you see the current access permissions. In the ``Reference: refs/heads/*``
section, you will need to add a permisson for the `Label Code-Review` for
the `Registered Users` group (we added the 'zuul' user to this group when we
created it).

.. note:: The label you configure here must match the label referenced in
          your Zuul pipeline definitions. We've chosen the Code-Review label
          here as an example.

Create a New Project
--------------------

The admin user can create new projects in Gerrit, which users can then clone
and use to submit code changes. Zuul will monitor the Gerrit event stream for
these submissions.

To create a new project named 'demo-project'

.. code-block:: console

   $ ssh -p 29418 $USER@localhost gerrit create-project demo-project --empty-commit

Modify the Project
------------------

Clone the project

.. code-block:: console

   $ git clone ssh://$USER@localhost:29418/demo-project.git

Install the change ID hook that Gerrit requires

.. code-block:: console

   $ cd demo-project
   $ scp -p -P 29418 $USER@localhost:hooks/commit-msg .git/hooks/

Now you are ready to modify the project and push the changes to Gerrit

.. code-block:: console

   $ echo "test" > README.txt
   $ git add .
   $ git commit -m "First commit"
   $ git push origin HEAD:refs/for/master

You should now be able to see your change in Gerrit.
