Installation
============

Install Zuul
------------

To install a Zuul release from PyPI, run::

    pip install zuul

Or from a git checkout, run::

    pip install .

That will also install Zuul's python dependencies.  To minimize
interaction with other python packages installed on a system, you may
wish to install Zuul within a Python virtualenv.

Zuul has several system-level dependencies as well.  You can find a
list of operating system packages in `bindep.txt` in Zuul's source
directory.

External Dependencies
---------------------

Zuul interacts with several other systems described below.

Gearman
~~~~~~~

Gearman is a job distribution system that Zuul uses to communicate
with its distributed components.  The Zuul scheduler distributes work
to Zuul mergers and executors use Gearman.  You may supply your own
gearman server, but the Zuul scheduler includes a built-in server
which is recommended.  Ensure that all Zuul hosts can communicate with
the gearman server.

Zuul distributes secrets to executors via gearman, so be sure to
secure it with TLS and certificate authentication.  Obtain (or
generate) a certificate for both the server and the clients (they may
use the same certificate or have individual certificates).  They must
be signed by a CA, but it can be your own CA.

Nodepool
~~~~~~~~

In order to run all but the simplest jobs, Zuul uses a companion
program, Nodepool, to supply the nodes (whether dynamic cloud
instances or static hardware) used by jobs.  Before starting Zuul,
ensure you have Nodepool installed and any images you require built.
Zuul only makes one requirement of these nodes: that it be able to log
in given a username and ssh private key.

.. TODO: SpamapS any zookeeper config recommendations?

Nodepool uses Zookeeper to communicate internally among its
components, and also to communicate with Zuul.  You can run a simple
single-node Zookeeper instance, or a multi-node cluster.  Ensure that
The host running the Zuul scheduler has access to the cluster.

Ansible
~~~~~~~

Zuul uses Ansible to run jobs.  Each version of Zuul is designed to
work with a specific, contemporary version of Ansible.  Zuul specifies
that version of Ansible in its python package metadata, and normally
the correct version will be installed automatically with Zuul.
Because of the close integration of Zuul and Ansible, attempting to
use other versions of Ansible with Zuul is not recommended.
