doc/source/admin/nodepool_openstack.rst, before:

:orphan:

Nodepool - Openstack
====================

Setup
-----

Before starting on this, you need to download your `openrc`
configuration from your OpenStack cloud.  Put it on your server in the
fedora user's home directory.  It should be called
``<username>-openrc.sh``.  Once that is done, create a new keypair
that will be installed when instantiating the servers::

   cd ~
   source <username>-openrc.sh  # this may prompt for password - enter it
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 2048 -f nodepool_rsa  # don't enter a passphrase
   openstack keypair create --public-key nodepool_rsa.pub nodepool

We'll use the private key later wheen configuring Zuul.  In the same
session, configure nodepool to talk to your cloud::

   umask 0066
   sudo mkdir -p ~nodepool/.config/openstack
   cat > clouds.yaml <<EOF
   clouds:
     mycloud:
       auth:
         username: $OS_USERNAME
         password: $OS_PASSWORD
         project_name: ${OS_PROJECT_NAME:-$OS_TENANT_NAME}
         auth_url: $OS_AUTH_URL
       region_name: $OS_REGION_NAME
   EOF
   sudo mv clouds.yaml ~nodepool/.config/openstack/
   sudo chown -R nodepool.nodepool ~nodepool/.config
   umask 0002

Once you've written out the file, double check all the required fields
have been filled out.

::

   sudo mkdir /etc/nodepool/
   sudo mkdir /var/log/nodepool
   sudo chgrp -R nodepool /var/log/nodepool/
   sudo chmod 775 /var/log/nodepool/

Configuration
-------------

Inputs needed for this file:

* cloud name / region name - from clouds.yaml
* flavor-name
* image-name - from your cloud

::

   sudo bash -c "cat >/etc/nodepool/nodepool.yaml <<EOF
   zookeeper-servers:
     - host: localhost
       port: 2181

   providers:
     - name: myprovider # this is a nodepool identifier for this cloud provider (cloud+region combo)
       region-name: regionOne  # this needs to match the region name in clouds.yaml but is only needed if there is more than one region
       cloud: mycloud  # This needs to match the name in clouds.yaml
       cloud-images:
         - name: centos-7   # Defines a cloud-image for nodepool
           image-name: CentOS-7-x86_64-GenericCloud-1706  # name of image from cloud
           username: centos  # The user Zuul should log in as
       pools:
         - name: main
           max-servers: 4  # nodepool will never create more than this many servers
           labels:
             - name: centos-7-small  # defines label that will be used to get one of these in a job
               flavor-name: 'm1.small'  # name of flavor from cloud
               cloud-image: centos-7  # matches name from cloud-images
               key-name: nodepool # name of the keypair to use for authentication

   labels:
     - name: centos-7-small # defines label that will be used in jobs
       min-ready: 2  # nodepool will always keep this many booted and ready to go
   EOF"

.. warning::

   `min-ready:2` may incur costs in your cloud provider

Commit message:

Use code-block for admin documentation and remove terminal prompts
The documentation contains commands to install and configure various
tools and services such as zuul, nodepool and gerrit. There are also
yaml snippets as examples.

This change switches to code-blocks for the commands and yaml snippets
to make the documentation consistent. Apart from this, all terminal
prompts are removed for consistency since majority of the documentation
do not use them. This also makes it easier for people who want to follow
steps one by one to do everything manually to get better understanding
regarding how things are put together and copy/paste helps.

Change-Id: I90b571bb4645984f07009b3cb7bd513b9d796d08
Signed-off-by: Fatih Degirmenci <fdegir@gmail.com>

doc/source/admin/nodepool_openstack.rst, after:

:orphan:

Nodepool - Openstack
====================

Setup
-----

Before starting on this, you need to download your `openrc`
configuration from your OpenStack cloud.  Put it on your server in the
fedora user's home directory.  It should be called
``<username>-openrc.sh``.  Once that is done, create a new keypair
that will be installed when instantiating the servers

.. code-block:: bash

   cd ~
   source <username>-openrc.sh  # this may prompt for password - enter it
   ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 2048 -f nodepool_rsa  # don't enter a passphrase
   openstack keypair create --public-key nodepool_rsa.pub nodepool

We'll use the private key later wheen configuring Zuul.  In the same
session, configure nodepool to talk to your cloud

.. code-block:: bash

   umask 0066
   sudo mkdir -p ~nodepool/.config/openstack
   cat > clouds.yaml <<EOF
   clouds:
     mycloud:
       auth:
         username: $OS_USERNAME
         password: $OS_PASSWORD
         project_name: ${OS_PROJECT_NAME:-$OS_TENANT_NAME}
         auth_url: $OS_AUTH_URL
       region_name: $OS_REGION_NAME
   EOF
   sudo mv clouds.yaml ~nodepool/.config/openstack/
   sudo chown -R nodepool.nodepool ~nodepool/.config
   umask 0002

Once you've written out the file, double check all the required fields
have been filled out.

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo mkdir /etc/nodepool/
   sudo mkdir /var/log/nodepool
   sudo chgrp -R nodepool /var/log/nodepool/
   sudo chmod 775 /var/log/nodepool/

Configuration
-------------

Inputs needed for this file:

* cloud name / region name - from clouds.yaml
* flavor-name
* image-name - from your cloud

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo bash -c "cat >/etc/nodepool/nodepool.yaml <<EOF
   zookeeper-servers:
     - host: localhost
       port: 2181

   providers:
     - name: myprovider # this is a nodepool identifier for this cloud provider (cloud+region combo)
       region-name: regionOne  # this needs to match the region name in clouds.yaml but is only needed if there is more than one region
       cloud: mycloud  # This needs to match the name in clouds.yaml
       cloud-images:
         - name: centos-7   # Defines a cloud-image for nodepool
           image-name: CentOS-7-x86_64-GenericCloud-1706  # name of image from cloud
           username: centos  # The user Zuul should log in as
       pools:
         - name: main
           max-servers: 4  # nodepool will never create more than this many servers
           labels:
             - name: centos-7-small  # defines label that will be used to get one of these in a job
               flavor-name: 'm1.small'  # name of flavor from cloud
               cloud-image: centos-7  # matches name from cloud-images
               key-name: nodepool # name of the keypair to use for authentication

   labels:
     - name: centos-7-small # defines label that will be used in jobs
       min-ready: 2  # nodepool will always keep this many booted and ready to go
   EOF"

.. warning::

   `min-ready:2` may incur costs in your cloud provider
